h1. Data Compass AI Modernization

h2. Purpose

Data Compass AI Modernization will make enterprise metadata AI-ready by transforming catalog metadata into searchable, relationship-aware, governed knowledge assets.

The platform will support:
* Semantic metadata discovery
* Exact metadata lookup
* Lineage and impact analysis
* Metadata enrichment
* Governance-aware search
* GraphRAG-based question answering
* Source-backed AI responses

h2. Business Outcomes

* Improve discovery of datasets, distributions, data products, reports, services, lineage, and governance metadata.
* Reduce manual effort for impact analysis and metadata investigation.
* Enable business-language search across technical metadata.
* Provide AI-generated answers grounded in source metadata.
* Preserve source traceability using *guid* and *jrn*.
* Support future metadata enrichment workflows.

h2. Architecture Summary

The platform will use:
* MongoDB as the authoritative source of Data Compass metadata.
* A canonical / normalized Data Compass metadata model as the contract.
* AI-ready document chunks for semantic search.
* MongoDB Atlas Vector Search for vector retrieval.
* Neo4j for graph projection, lineage, and relationship traversal.
* A Data Compass Search Service for exact, semantic, hybrid, and graph search.
* A Context Plane for acronyms, historical Q&A, bookmarks, feedback, and agent orchestration.
* GraphRAG to combine vector search and graph traversal.

h2. Primary Design Principle

{quote}
MongoDB remains the system of record. Vector indexes and Neo4j are derived, rebuildable projections.
{quote}

h2. MVP Scope

MVP will focus on:
* Distribution
* Dataset
* DataModelEntity
* DataModelAttribute
* DataService
* DataFlow
* DataProcess
* Node
* Report

h2. Out of Scope for MVP

* Full event-level embedding of all runtime events
* Automated metadata updates without human approval
* Full governance/retention automation
* All 34 entity types in the first release
* Production-grade autonomous agents
* Full self-healing metadata correction

h2. Success Criteria

|| Category || Success Criteria ||
| Discovery | Users can find assets by exact name, JRN, GUID, schema, table, report, and owner. |
| Semantic Search | Users can find assets using business-language search. |
| Lineage | Users can ask upstream/downstream lineage questions. |
| Traceability | Answers include source references. |
| Security | Unauthorized or deprecated assets are filtered before LLM context assembly. |
| Operations | Reindexing can be performed deterministically by asset or entity type. |

h2. Reference Model Notes

The Data Compass model defines 34 entity types across physical/logical assets, semantic layer, lineage, events, governance/classification, and foundational entities. The model uses *jrn* as the cross-entity relationship key and *guid* as the internal uniqueness key.
