h1. Current-State Architecture

h2. Purpose

This page documents the current architecture direction for Data Compass AI Modernization.

h2. Current Logical Flow

{code}
Source Metadata
→ Data Compass Ingestion Service
→ Canonical / Normalized Metadata Model
→ MongoDB Document Store
→ MongoDB Vector Indexes
→ Neo4j Graph Projection
→ Data Compass Search Service
→ Context Plane / Agents
→ Data Compass UI / Answer Plane
{code}

h2. Source Systems

* Snowflake
* Databricks
* Tableau
* Alteryx
* Data Compass API
* Harvester / Crawler

h2. Core Storage Components

h3. MongoDB

MongoDB stores the authoritative Data Compass metadata model.

Responsibilities:
* Store catalog entities
* Store canonical metadata records
* Store AI-ready chunks, if using MongoDB as the vector document store
* Store source *guid*, *jrn*, lifecycle, ownership, classification, and entity metadata

h3. MongoDB Atlas Vector Search

Responsibilities:
* Store embeddings
* Support semantic search
* Support metadata-filtered vector search
* Support AI chunk retrieval

h3. Neo4j

Neo4j is a derived graph projection.

Responsibilities:
* Store lineage relationships
* Store asset relationships
* Support upstream/downstream traversal
* Support impact analysis
* Support GraphRAG graph expansion

h2. Data Compass Search Service

Responsibilities:
* Exact metadata search
* Semantic vector search
* Graph traversal search
* Hybrid search
* Source hydration
* Citation/source output

h2. Context Plane

The Context Plane supports:
* Acronyms
* Historical Q&A
* Human feedback
* User bookmarks
* Self-evaluation
* Supervisor Agent
* Structured Discovery Agent
* Metadata Enrichment Agent

h2. Known Gaps

|| Gap || Impact || Owner || Status ||
| MVP entity scope needs formal approval | Blocks Phase 1 build | TBD | Open |
| JRN construction and identity rules need to be finalized | Blocks chunking and graph projection | TBD | Open |
| Search security filtering model needs to be defined | Blocks production readiness | TBD | Open |
| Graph projection schema needs to be finalized | Blocks Neo4j build | TBD | Open |
| Chunk schema and embedding strategy need to be approved | Blocks vector indexing | TBD | Open |
