h1. Target-State Architecture

h2. Purpose

This page defines the target architecture for Data Compass AI Modernization.

h2. Target Architecture Principles

# MongoDB remains authoritative.
# Vector and graph stores are derived projections.
# *jrn* is the stable relationship and retrieval identity.
# AI chunks must be source-backed and deterministic.
# Graph relationships must be rebuildable from canonical metadata.
# Security filters must run before context is sent to the LLM.
# AI enrichment suggestions require human approval.
# Raw event records should be summarized before vectorization.

h2. Target Logical Architecture

{code}
MongoDB Data Compass Collections
        ↓
Canonical Metadata Normalization
        ↓
Relationship Resolver
        ↓
AI Chunk Builder
        ↓
Embedding + Vector Indexing
        ↓
Semantic Search

Canonical Metadata Normalization
        ↓
Graph Projection Builder
        ↓
Neo4j Graph
        ↓
Graph Search / Lineage Traversal

Semantic Search + Graph Search
        ↓
GraphRAG Orchestrator
        ↓
Context Plane
        ↓
Answer Plane
{code}

h2. Store Responsibilities

|| Store || Responsibility ||
| MongoDB | Source of truth for Data Compass metadata |
| MongoDB Vector Index | Semantic search over AI-ready chunks |
| Neo4j | Relationship traversal, lineage, impact analysis |
| Redis / Context Store | Session context, acronyms, bookmarks, feedback |
| Search Service | Controlled retrieval API |
| GraphRAG Orchestrator | Combines vector, graph, exact lookup, and answer composition |

h2. Key Non-Functional Requirements

* Traceability
* Security
* Deterministic reindexing
* Rebuildable projections
* Observable indexing pipeline
* Source-backed answers
* Low-latency retrieval

h2. Major Data Flows

|| Flow || Description ||
| Metadata ingestion | Source metadata is read, normalized, validated, and persisted. |
| AI chunk projection | Canonical metadata is rendered into relationship-aware text chunks. |
| Vector projection | AI chunks are embedded and stored with filterable metadata. |
| Graph projection | Canonical metadata relationships are loaded into Neo4j. |
| Retrieval | Search Service combines exact, semantic, and graph search. |
| GraphRAG | Orchestrator assembles grounded context and produces source-backed answers. |
