h1. Canonical / Normalized Metadata Model

h2. Purpose

Define the normalized Data Compass metadata contract used by ingestion, vector indexing, graph projection, search, GraphRAG, and context assembly.

h2. Source Model

The Data Compass model contains 34 entity types across:
* Physical and logical assets
* Business / semantic layer
* Lineage and movement
* Event records
* Governance and classification
* Foundational entities

h2. Identity Rules

h3. GUID

*guid* is the internal Data Compass uniqueness key.

Usage:
* Source record identity
* MongoDB document identity
* Audit and traceability
* Reindexing reference

h3. JRN

*jrn* is the stable cross-entity relationship key.

Usage:
* Relationship resolution
* AI chunk source identity
* Graph node identity
* Search result source reference
* Citation/reference output

h2. Required Metadata on All AI/Graph Projections

* source_guid
* source_jrn
* entity_type
* source_collection
* version
* lifecycleStatus
* createdTimestamp
* updatedTimestamp
* owners
* node reference, where applicable
* classification metadata, where applicable

h2. Lifecycle Handling

|| lifecycleStatus || Search Behavior ||
| DRAFT | Excluded by default |
| PUBLISHED | Searchable |
| APPROVED | Searchable |
| PENDING_APPROVAL | Restricted search |
| REJECTED | Excluded |
| DEPRECATED | Excluded by default; available for historical search if enabled |

h2. Relationship Rules

Relationships must be resolved using *jrn* reference fields.

Examples:
* Dataset to Distribution
* DataProduct to Dataset
* DataService to Distribution
* DataFlow provider to consumer
* DataProcess inbound to outbound assets
* Report to underlying assets
* Attribute to DataElement

h2. Pitfalls

|| Pitfall || Impact || Mitigation ||
| Unstable JRN | Breaks traceability and graph edges | Define deterministic JRN rules |
| Missing JRN | Cannot link records | Create fallback and exception handling |
| Incorrect lifecycle handling | Stale assets appear in answers | Enforce lifecycle filters |
| Missing owner/node mapping | Weak access control | Resolve ownership and node early |

h2. Open Questions

|| ID || Question || Impact || Owner || Status ||
| OQ-001 | Does crawler mint guid and jrn, or does catalog DB assign them? | Blocks identity design | TBD | Open |
| OQ-002 | What is the deterministic JRN format for each source platform? | Blocks chunks and graph nodes | TBD | Open |
| OQ-003 | Which lifecycle statuses should be searchable by default? | Blocks retrieval filters | TBD | Open |
