h1. Evaluation and Success Metrics

h2. Purpose

Define how retrieval quality, graph correctness, answer quality, and security will be measured.

h2. Evaluation Categories

|| Category || Metric ||
| Exact Search | Exact lookup accuracy |
| Semantic Search | Top-K retrieval accuracy |
| Graph Search | Lineage correctness |
| Answer Quality | Groundedness and citation coverage |
| Security | Unauthorized retrieval prevention |
| Operations | Reindex success rate |
| Performance | Latency |

h2. Golden Question Set

Golden questions should cover:
* Exact lookup
* Semantic discovery
* Lineage / impact
* Governance / classification
* Ambiguous entity handling
* Missing metadata handling
* Restricted metadata access

h2. Initial Success Targets

|| Metric || MVP Target ||
| Exact lookup accuracy | 95%+ |
| Top-5 semantic retrieval accuracy | 80%+ |
| Lineage traversal correctness | 90%+ |
| Answer citation coverage | 95%+ |
| Unauthorized retrieval prevention | 100% |
| Reindex success rate | 95%+ |

h2. Requirements

|| ID || Requirement || Priority ||
| EVAL-001 | Create golden question set | P0 |
| EVAL-002 | Define expected answers | P0 |
| EVAL-003 | Build retrieval evaluation | P1 |
| EVAL-004 | Build lineage correctness evaluation | P1 |
| EVAL-005 | Build answer quality evaluation | P1 |
| EVAL-006 | Build access-control test suite | P1 |
| EVAL-007 | Build regression test report | P1 |

h2. Initial Golden Question Categories

h3. Exact Lookup

* Find Distribution by JRN.
* Find Dataset by name.
* Find Report by report identification number.
* Find assets owned by SID.
* Find tables in schema X.

h3. Semantic Discovery

* Find datasets related to customer risk.
* Find assets related to liquidity reporting.
* Find reports that use trade exposure data.
* Find data products related to regulatory reporting.
* Find attributes that represent customer identifiers.

h3. Lineage / Impact

* What is upstream of Distribution X?
* What is downstream of Distribution X?
* Which reports depend on Dataset X?
* Which DataProcesses produce Distribution X?
* Which services expose Distribution X?

h3. Governance / Classification

* Which assets contain personal information?
* Which attributes are highly confidential?
* Which datasets have purge indicators?
* Which assets are deprecated?
* Which nodes are authoritative sources?
