h1. 16. Architecture Decision Log

h2. 1. Purpose

The Architecture Decision Log records important architecture decisions for Data Compass AI Modernization. Each Architecture Decision Record (ADR) explains the decision, options considered, rationale, consequences, and related Jira items.

h2. 2. ADR Process

# Create ADR as Proposed.
# Review with architecture/product/engineering/security stakeholders.
# Mark as Accepted when decision is approved.
# Mark as Superseded if replaced by a later decision.
# Link ADR to related Jira stories and Confluence pages.

h2. 3. ADR Status Values

|| Status || Meaning ||
| Proposed | Draft decision under review. |
| Accepted | Approved and active. |
| Superseded | Replaced by later ADR. |
| Rejected | Considered but not selected. |

h2. 4. ADR Index

|| ADR || Decision || Status || Related Pages ||
| ADR-001 | MongoDB remains authoritative source of metadata. | Proposed | 02, 04 |
| ADR-002 | Vector and graph stores are derived projections. | Proposed | 02, 07, 08 |
| ADR-003 | JRN is the stable relationship identity key. | Proposed | 04, 05, 06, 08 |
| ADR-004 | MVP entity scope. | Proposed | 03, 04 |
| ADR-005 | MongoDB Atlas Vector Search as initial vector store. | Proposed | 07, 09 |
| ADR-006 | Neo4j as graph projection for lineage and impact analysis. | Proposed | 08, 10 |
| ADR-007 | AI chunks use deterministic chunk IDs. | Proposed | 06, 07 |
| ADR-008 | Security filters are applied before LLM context assembly. | Proposed | 12 |
| ADR-009 | Raw event records are summarized before vectorization. | Proposed | 03, 06, 07 |
| ADR-010 | AI enrichment suggestions require human approval. | Proposed | 11 |
| ADR-011 | Search Service is the controlled retrieval boundary. | Proposed | 09, 10 |
| ADR-012 | Historical Q&A cannot override source metadata. | Proposed | 11, 12 |

h2. 5. ADR Template

{code}
h1. ADR-###: <Decision Title>

h2. Status

Proposed / Accepted / Superseded / Rejected

h2. Context

What problem are we solving?

h2. Options Considered

# Option A
# Option B
# Option C

h2. Decision

What did we choose?

h2. Rationale

Why did we choose it?

h2. Consequences

What tradeoffs or follow-up work does this create?

h2. Related Jira

* DC-AI-###

h2. Related Confluence Pages

* Page links
{code}

h2. 6. Initial ADR Details

h3. ADR-001: MongoDB remains authoritative source of metadata

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* MongoDB remains the source of truth for Data Compass metadata. Vector indexes and Neo4j are derived projections.

*Rationale:* The authoritative Data Compass data model is represented in MongoDB collections. Vector and graph layers are optimized retrieval projections and should remain rebuildable.

*Consequences:*

* Updates must flow from MongoDB/canonical model.
* Neo4j and vector indexes require sync/reindex controls.
* Source hydration should use MongoDB.

h3. ADR-002: Vector and graph stores are derived projections

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* MongoDB Atlas Vector Search and Neo4j will not own authoritative metadata.

*Rationale:* This prevents conflicting sources of truth and simplifies reconciliation.

h3. ADR-003: JRN is the stable relationship identity key

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* jrn will be used as the primary relationship identity across chunks, graph nodes, search results, and citations where available.

*Rationale:* The Data Compass model uses jrn for cross-entity references.

h3. ADR-004: MVP entity scope

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* MVP includes Distribution, Dataset, DataModelEntity, DataModelAttribute, DataService, DataFlow, DataProcess, Node, and Report.

*Rationale:* These entities support asset search, column search, service discovery, basic lineage, and report impact.

h3. ADR-005: MongoDB Atlas Vector Search as initial vector store

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Start with MongoDB Atlas Vector Search for MVP semantic retrieval.

*Rationale:* Source metadata is already MongoDB-centered and metadata filtering is critical.

h3. ADR-006: Neo4j as graph projection for lineage and impact analysis

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Use Neo4j for graph traversal and impact analysis.

*Rationale:* The catalog is relationship-heavy and lineage questions are better served by graph traversal than vector similarity alone.

h3. ADR-007: AI chunks use deterministic chunk IDs

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Chunk IDs will be generated deterministically from source jrn, entity type, chunk type, sequence, and schema version.

*Rationale:* Deterministic IDs enable idempotent upsert and reindexing.

h3. ADR-008: Security filters before LLM context assembly

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Access filters must be applied before any metadata is passed to the LLM.

*Rationale:* Prompt instructions are not a security boundary.

h3. ADR-009: Raw event records are summarized before vectorization

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* High-volume runtime events will be summarized before embedding.

*Rationale:* Embedding every raw event may create cost, scale, and noise problems.

h3. ADR-010: AI enrichment suggestions require human approval

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* AI-generated metadata improvements are suggestions only until approved.

*Rationale:* Authoritative metadata requires governance and accountability.

h3. ADR-011: Search Service is the controlled retrieval boundary

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Agents and UI clients should access metadata retrieval through Search Service APIs.

*Rationale:* This centralizes security, auditing, filtering, ranking, and source hydration.

h3. ADR-012: Historical Q&A cannot override source metadata

*Status:* Proposed

*Decision:* Historical Q&A may support interpretation but must not override authoritative source records.

*Rationale:* Validated answers can become stale; source metadata must govern.
