h1. Jira Backlog Map

h2. Jira Hierarchy

{code}
Initiative: Data Compass AI Modernization
  Epic: Architecture and Planning
    Story: DC-AI-001 ...
  Epic: Canonical Metadata Foundation
    Story: DC-AI-010 ...
{code}

h2. Initiative

*Initiative:* Data Compass AI Modernization

*Description:* Deliver an AI-ready Data Compass metadata platform using MongoDB as the authoritative metadata source, vector search for semantic retrieval, Neo4j for graph relationship traversal, GraphRAG for grounded question answering, and a Context Plane for enterprise context and agent orchestration.

h2. Jira Labels

* data-compass-ai
* metadata
* graphrag
* vector-search
* mongodb
* neo4j
* lineage
* context-plane
* security
* mvp

h2. Jira Components

* Canonical Model
* Ingestion
* Chunk Builder
* Vector Index
* Neo4j Graph
* Search Service
* GraphRAG
* Context Plane
* Agents
* Security
* Evaluation
* Operations
* UI

h2. Epics

|| Epic || Description ||
| EPIC 1: Architecture and Planning | Define architecture, scope, decisions, risks, and delivery structure. |
| EPIC 2: Canonical Metadata Foundation | Define normalized model, identity, relationships, lifecycle, and classification handling. |
| EPIC 3: Metadata Ingestion Service | Read MongoDB metadata, validate, resolve relationships, and prepare for projection. |
| EPIC 4: AI Document and Chunk Builder | Convert metadata into deterministic AI-readable chunks. |
| EPIC 5: Embedding and Vector Indexing | Embed chunks and store them in vector-searchable index. |
| EPIC 6: Graph Projection and Neo4j Builder | Build Neo4j graph projection for lineage and relationships. |
| EPIC 7: Data Compass Search Service | Provide exact, semantic, graph, hybrid, hydration, and citation APIs. |
| EPIC 8: GraphRAG Orchestration | Combine retrieval paths and generate grounded answers. |
| EPIC 9: Context Plane and Agent Layer | Build enterprise context and thin agent orchestration. |
| EPIC 10: Security and Access Control | Enforce retrieval-level access controls before LLM context assembly. |
| EPIC 11: Evaluation and Quality | Measure retrieval, lineage, answer quality, and security. |
| EPIC 12: Operations and Monitoring | Build indexing dashboards, reindexing, reconciliation, and runbooks. |
| EPIC 13: UI / User Experience Integration | Integrate AI search and feedback into Data Compass UI. |

h2. Story Template

{code}
h2. Objective

Describe what this story delivers.

h2. Background

Explain why this work is needed.

h2. Scope

h3. In Scope

* ...

h3. Out of Scope

* ...

h2. Requirements

* ...

h2. Inputs

* ...

h2. Outputs

* ...

h2. Dependencies

* ...

h2. Pitfalls / Risks

* ...

h2. Acceptance Criteria

* [ ] ...
* [ ] ...

h2. Test / Evidence

* ...

h2. Related Confluence

* <link>
{code}

h2. Definition of Ready

* Objective is clear.
* Requirements are documented.
* Dependencies are identified.
* Acceptance criteria are written.
* Related Confluence page is linked.
* Security impact is understood.
* Test/evidence expectation is defined.

h2. Definition of Done

* Work is completed.
* Acceptance criteria are met.
* Unit/integration tests are complete where applicable.
* Evidence is attached to Jira.
* Related Confluence page is updated.
* Demo is completed where required.
* Operational notes are added if applicable.
